{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times Bold;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0 Times Roman;}}{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}{\stylesheet {\style\s1 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs32\b\cf0 heading 1;}{\style\s2 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs28\b\i\cf0 heading 2;}{\style\s3 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs26\b\cf0 heading 3;}{\style\s0 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs24\cf0 Normal;}}{\*\listtable}{\*\listoverridetable}{\*\generator iText 2.1.7 by 1T3XT}{\info{\author Dimitri Brosens}{\creationdate \yr2018\mo02\dy01\hr11\min14\sec10}{\title Inland water macroinvertebrate occurrences in Flanders, Belgium}{\keywords Samplingevent, Flemish Environment Agency, VMM, macroinvertebrates, biotic indices, water quality, sediment}}\paperw11907\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440\pgwsxn11907\pghsxn16840\marglsxn1440\margrsxn1440\margtsxn1440\margbsxn1440\pard\plain\s0\qc\fi0\li0\ri0\plain\f3\fs28\b\cf0 Inland water macroinvertebrate occurrences in Flanders, Belgium\b0\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qc\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Rudy \f3\fs24\cf0 Vannevel\f3\fs24\cf0\super 1\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Ward \f3\fs24\cf0 De Cooman\f3\fs24\cf0\super 1\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Wim \f3\fs24\cf0 Gabriels\f3\fs24\cf0\super 1\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Frank \f3\fs24\cf0 Lavens\f3\fs24\cf0\super 1\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Joost \f3\fs24\cf0 Mertens\f3\fs24\cf0\super 1\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Bart \f3\fs24\cf0 Vervaeke\f3\fs24\cf0\super 1\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Dimitri \f3\fs24\cf0 Brosens\f3\fs24\cf0\super 2\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Dimitri \f3\fs24\cf0 Brosens\f3\fs24\cf0\super 3\nosupersub\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 1 \f3\fs24\cf0 Flanders Environment Agency (VMM), \f3\fs24\cf0 Dr. De Moorstraat 24-26, \f3\fs24\cf0 9300, \f3\fs24\cf0 Aalst\f3\fs24\cf0 , Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 ; \f3\fs24\cf0 2 \f3\fs24\cf0 Research Institute for Nature and Forest (INBO) / Belgian Biodiversity Platform, \f3\fs24\cf0 Havenlaan 88, bus 73, \f3\fs24\cf0 1000, \f3\fs24\cf0 Brussels\f3\fs24\cf0 , Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 ; \f3\fs24\cf0 3 \f3\fs24\cf0 Research Institute for Nature and Forest (INBO) / Belgian Biodiversity Platform, \f3\fs24\cf0 Havenlaan 88, bus 73, \f3\fs24\cf0 1070, \f3\fs24\cf0 Brussels\f3\fs24\cf0 , Belgium\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Corresponding author(s): \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Rudy \f3\fs24\cf0 Vannevel\f3\fs24\cf0  (r.vannevel@vmm.be)\f3\fs24\cf0 Ward \f3\fs24\cf0 De Cooman\f3\fs24\cf0 Wim \f3\fs24\cf0 Gabriels\f3\fs24\cf0 Frank \f3\fs24\cf0 Lavens\f3\fs24\cf0 Joost \f3\fs24\cf0 Mertens\f3\fs24\cf0 Bart \f3\fs24\cf0 Vervaeke\f3\fs24\cf0 Dimitri \f3\fs24\cf0 Brosens\f3\fs24\cf0  (dimitri.brosens@inbo.be)\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Dimitri \f3\fs24\cf0 Brosens\f3\fs24\cf0  (dimitri.brosens@inbo.be)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Received \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Revised \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Accepted \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Published \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Citation: \b0\f3\fs24\cf2 Combination of authors, year of data paper publication (in parentheses), Title, Journal Name, Volume, Issue number (in parentheses), and doi of the data paper.\f3\fs24\cf2 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Resource Citation\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Vannevel R, De Cooman W, Gabriels W, Lavens F, Mertens J, Vervaeke B, Brosens D (2017): Inland water macroinvertebrate occurrences in Flanders, Belgium. v1.8. Flanders Environment Agency. Dataset/Samplingevent. https://doi.org/10.15468/4cvbka\f3\fs24\cf0  \f3\fs24\cf0 https://doi.org/10.15468/4cvbka\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Abstract\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 The Flemish Environment Agency (VMM) is performing biological water quality assessments on inland waters in Flanders (Belgium) since 1989 and sediment quality assessments since 2000. The water quality monitoring network is a combined physico-chemical and biological network, the biological component focusing on macro-invertebrates. The sediment monitoring program produces biological data to assess sediment quality. Both monitoring programs aim to provide index values, applying a similar conceptual methodology based on the presence of macro-invertebrates. The biological data obtained from both monitoring networks are consolidated in the VMM database. The dataset published contains: 283,141 records of 207 observed taxa from 4,152 monitoring sites located on more than 669 different water courses. The data are distributed to the public domain under the Creative Commons CC-BY license.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 The data in this sampling event resource has been published as a Darwin Core Archive (DwC-A), which is a standardized format for sharing biodiversity data as a set of one or more data tables. The core data table contains 22,663 records. 2 extension data tables also exist. An extension record supplies extra information about a core record. The number of records in each extension data table is illustrated below.\par \par Event (core) 22663\par Occurrence  282309\par MeasurementOrFact  101978\par The IPT archives the data and thus serves as the data repository. The data and resource metadata are available for download here: https://ipt.inbo.be/resource?r=vmm-macroinvertebrates-events\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Keywords: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Samplingevent, Flemish Environment Agency, VMM, macroinvertebrates, biotic indices, water quality, sediment\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 General description\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Purpose: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 The macro-invertebrates data set contains data on inland water bodies (assessment of water quality) and on sediments (assessment of sediment quality) to allow calculation of biotic indices.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Additional information: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 To allow anyone to use this dataset, we have released the data to the public domain under a Creative Commons CC-BY licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode). If you use these data for a scientific paper, please cite the dataset following the applicable citation norms and/or consider us for co-authorship. We are always interested to know how you have used or visualized the data, or to provide more information, so please contact us via the contact information provided in the metadata.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Data published through \b0\f0{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK http://www.gbif.org}{\fldrslt \pard\plain\f3\fs24\ul\cf3 GBIF\ul0 }}\f3\fs24\cf0 : \f0{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK https://ipt.inbo.be/resource?r=vmm-macroinvertebrates-events}{\fldrslt \pard\plain\f3\fs24\ul\cf3 https://ipt.inbo.be/resource?r=vmm-macroinvertebrates-events\ul0 }}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Taxonomic coverage\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 General taxonomic coverage description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 The list below shows the taxonomic classification of macro-invertebrates expected to occur or observed. According to the VMM identification list (version 14 March 2017), 241 taxa are selected. Out of this number, 207 taxa have been observed between 1989 and 2016. Some taxa (between brackets) have occurred or are expected to occur in Belgium, but do not appear in the data set. In particular some taxa of Odonata, Ephemeroptera, and Plecoptera are considered less common in Flanders. On the other hand, the total number also includes some non-target taxa.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Taxonomic ranks\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Kingdom: \f3\fs24\cf0 Animalia\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Phylum: \f3\fs24\cf0 Coelenterata\f3\fs24\cf0 , Plathelminthes\f3\fs24\cf0 , Nemertea\f3\fs24\cf0 , Nemathelminthes\f3\fs24\cf0 , Annelida\f3\fs24\cf0 , Mollusca\f3\fs24\cf0 , Arthropoda\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Subphylum: \f3\fs24\cf0 Crustacea\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Class: \f3\fs24\cf0 Hydrozoa\f3\fs24\cf0 , Turbellaria\f3\fs24\cf0 , Oligochaeta\f3\fs24\cf0 , Polychaeta\f3\fs24\cf0 , Hirudinea\f3\fs24\cf0 , Gastropoda\f3\fs24\cf0 , Bivalvia\f3\fs24\cf0 , Arachnida\f3\fs24\cf0 , Branchiopoda\f3\fs24\cf0 , Ostracoda\f3\fs24\cf0 , Maxillopoda\f3\fs24\cf0 , Malacostraca\f3\fs24\cf0 , Insecta\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Subclass: \f3\fs24\cf0 Branchiura\f3\fs24\cf0 , Copepoda\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Order: \f3\fs24\cf0 Rhabdocoela\f3\fs24\cf0 , Seriata\f3\fs24\cf0 , Aranea\f3\fs24\cf0 , Anostraca\f3\fs24\cf0 , Notostraca\f3\fs24\cf0 , Conchostraca\f3\fs24\cf0 , Cladocera\f3\fs24\cf0 , Mysidacea\f3\fs24\cf0 , Amphipoda\f3\fs24\cf0 , Isopoda\f3\fs24\cf0 , Decapoda\f3\fs24\cf0 , Ephemeroptera\f3\fs24\cf0 , Odonata\f3\fs24\cf0 , Plecoptera\f3\fs24\cf0 , Hempitera\f3\fs24\cf0 , Neuroptera\f3\fs24\cf0 , Megaloptera\f3\fs24\cf0 , Coleoptera\f3\fs24\cf0 , Trichoptera\f3\fs24\cf0 , Lepidoptera\f3\fs24\cf0 , Diptera\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Family: \f3\fs24\cf0 Planariidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Dugesiidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Dendrocoelidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Aeolosomatidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Branchiobdellidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Enchytraeidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Haplotaxidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Lumbricidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Lumbriculidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Naididae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Tubificidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Ampharetidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Sabellidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Chirocephalidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Triopsidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Leptestheriidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Limnadiidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Cladocera\f3\fs24\cf0 , Argulidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Asellidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Astacidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Atyidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Cambaridae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Corophiidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Crangonyctidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Gammaridae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Janiridae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Mysidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Palaemonidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Panopeidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Sphaeromatidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Talitridae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Tanaidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Vanuridae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Sisyridae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Osmylidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Sialidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Dryopidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Dytiscidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Elminthidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Gyrinidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Haliplidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Hydraenidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Hydrophilidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Hygrobiidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Noteridae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Psephenidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Scirtidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Beraeidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Branchycentridae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Ecnomidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Glossosomatidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Goeridae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Hydropsychidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Hydroptilidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Lepidostomatidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Leptoceridae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Limnephilidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Molannidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Odontoceridae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Philopotamidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Phryganeidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Polycentropodidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Psychomyidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Rhyacophilidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Sericostomatidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Athericidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Blephariceridae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Ceratopogonidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Chaoboridae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Chironomidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Culicidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Cylindrotomidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Dixidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Dolichopodidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Empididae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Ephydridae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Limoniidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Muscidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Psychodidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Ptychoperidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Rhagionidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Scatophagidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Sciomyzidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Simulidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Stratiomyidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Syrphidae-Eristalinae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Tabanidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Thaumaleidae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Tipulidae\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Subfamily: \f3\fs24\cf0 Eristalinae\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Spatial coverage\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 General spatial coverage: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Belgium is located in the center of Western Europe and its surface area reaches 30,528 km\u178?. Of the three administrative regions, Flanders is situated in the northern part and covers an area of 13,522 km\u178? (which is 44.29 % of the Belgian territory), roughly situated on 51\u176? latitude and 4\u176? longitude.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Coordinates: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 50\u176?37'48''N\f3\fs24\cf0  and \f3\fs24\cf0 51\u176?30'36''N\f3\fs24\cf0  Latitude; \f3\fs24\cf0 2\u176?31'48''E\f3\fs24\cf0  and \f3\fs24\cf0 5\u176?56'24''E\f3\fs24\cf0  Longitude \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Temporal coverage: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 March 15, 1989\f3\fs24\cf0  - \f3\fs24\cf0 November 30, 2016\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Natural collections description\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Collection name: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 VMM macroinvertebrates\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Methods\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Method step description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Users of the data can comment on this macro-invertebrate dataset at https://github.com/LifeWatchVMM/macro-invertebrates -occurrences .\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Study extent description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 The macro-invertebrates data set contains data on inland water bodies (assessment of water quality) and on sediments (assessment of sediment quality) to allow calculation of biotic indices. Biotic indices are based on two properties: the number of taxa indicating the biodiversity, and the sensitivity of organisms (of a selected number of taxa) to (mainly organic) pollution. Biotic indices based on macro-invertebrates complement the physico-chemical water quality and are commonly considered as pollution indicators (for this reason they are called water quality indices), although they also partially reflect overall habitat conditions. Since biotic indices are intended for quick and practical use, numbers of organisms are estimated and the identification level is restricted.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Sampling description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 The sediment quality network\par The procedure for sampling macro-invertebrates in sediments waters is described in a compendium for sampling and analysis, authorised by the Flemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO). Prescribed sampling methods include core and grab samplers. Field observations, including in situ physico-chemical measurements, are noted on a field protocol.  The methods for sampling and sample treatment are standardized and certified; additional information can be obtained by contacting the corresponding authors. Relevant field information is included in the reported database, partially aggregated under \u8216?dwc:dynamicProperties\u8217?.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Quality control description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Comments regarding quality control apply to both the water and sediment quality networks. Field protocols and identification lists were used to allow comparable observations. However, a number of versions with new and adapted data elements haven been produced. Field observations are highly objectivated in this way, although differences resulting from personal interpretation may still occur. The same applies to taxonomic identification, and in this respect it is advised to consult also the expert publications based on the VMM data set (see reference list: publications based on this dataset). Differences with present taxonomic nomenclature can be experienced, for the reason distortion of biotic index values is avoided as much as possible. Be aware a large number of people contributed to the taxonomic identification over the years, which unavoidably led to errors (misidentification, inclusion of terrestrial taxa, etc.). For taxonomic verification of sample material, experts can contact the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences (RBINS, Brussels) (http://collections.naturalsciences.be/) where the VMM macro-invertebrate samples are stored. RBINS identifiers apply to all VMM samples of a single year.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Datasets\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Dataset description\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Object name: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Darwin Core Archive Inland water macroinvertebrate occurrences in Flanders, Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Character encoding: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 UTF-8\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Format name: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Darwin Core Archive format\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Format version: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 1.0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Distribution: \b0\f0{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK https://ipt.inbo.be/archive.do?r=vmm-macroinvertebrates-events}{\fldrslt \pard\plain\f3\fs24\ul\cf3 https://ipt.inbo.be/archive.do?r=vmm-macroinvertebrates-events\ul0 }}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Publication date of data: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 2018-02-01\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Language: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 English\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Licences of use: \b0\f0{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode}{\fldrslt \pard\plain\f3\fs24\ul\cf3 Creative Commons Attribution (CC-BY) 4.0 License\ul0 }}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Metadata language: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 English\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Date of metadata creation: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 2017-12-22\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Hierarchy level: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Dataset\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 References\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 De Deckere E., De Cooman W., Florus M. & Devroede-Vanderlinden M.-P. (red), 2000. Handboek voor de karakterisatie van de bodems van de Vlaamse waterlopen, volgens triade. Ministerie van de Vlaamse Gemeenschap. 112 p. (in Dutch)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 De Pauw N., Beyst B. & Heylen S., 2000. Development of a biological assessment method for river sediments in Flanders, Belgium. Verh. Internat. Verein. Limnol. 27: 2703-2708.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 De Pauw N. & Heylen S., 2001. Biotic index for sediment quality assessment of watercourses in Flanders, Belgium. Aquatic Ecology 35: 121\u8211?133, 2001.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 De Pauw N., Roels D. & Fontoura A.P., 1986. Use of artificial substrates for standardized sampling of macroinvertebrates in the assessment of water quality by the Belgian Biotic Index. Hydrobiologia 133:  237-258.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 De Pauw N. & Vanhooren G., 1983. Method for the biological quality assessment of watercourses in Belgium. Hydrobiologia, 100: 153-168.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 De Pauw N. & Vannevel R., 1991. Macro-invertebraten en waterkwaliteit. Stichting Leefmilieu, Antwerpen. 316 p. (in Dutch)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Gabriels W., Goethals P. L. M. & De Pauw N., 2005. Implications of taxonomic modifications and alien species on biological water quality assessment as exemplified by the Belgian Biotic Index method. Hydrobiologia (2005) 542:137\u8211?150.\f3\fs24\cf0  \f3\fs24\cf0 DOI 10.1007/s10750-004-1452-7 \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Gabriels W., Lock K., De Pauw N. & Goethals P.L.M., 2010. Multimetric Macroinvertebrate Index Flanders (MMIF) for biological assessment of rivers and lakes in Flanders (Belgium). Limnologica 40 (2010) 199\u8211?207.\f3\fs24\cf0  \f3\fs24\cf0 doi:10.1016/j.limno.2009.10.001 \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 NBN, 1984. Qualit\u233? biologique des cours d\u8217?eau \u8211? Determination de l\u8217?indice biotique se basant sur les macro-invert\u233?br\u233?s aquatiques. / Biologische kwaliteit van de waterlopen \u8211? Bepaling van de biotische index steunende op aquatische macro-invertebraten. Norme Belge \u8211? Belgische Norm NBN T92-402. Belgisch Instituut voor normalisatie \u8211? Institut Belge de Normalisation. 11 p. (in Dutch and French)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 VMM, 2009. Biological assessment of the natural, heavily modified and artificial surface water bodies in Flanders according to the European Water Framework Directive. Vlaamse Milieumaatschappij (VMM), Aalst, Belgium. December 2009. 80 p\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Robertson T., D\u246?ring M., Guralnick R., Bloom D., Wieczorek J. et al., 2014. The GBIF Integrated Publishing Toolkit: Facilitating the Efficient Publishing of Biodiversity Data on the Internet. PLoS ONE 9(8): e102623.\f3\fs24\cf0  \f3\fs24\cf0 doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102623 \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Wieczorek J., Bloom D., Guralnick R., Blum S., D\u246?ring M. et al., 2012. Darwin Core: An Evolving Community-Developed Biodiversity Data Standard. PLoS ONE 7(1): e29715.\f3\fs24\cf0  \f3\fs24\cf0 doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029715\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Boets P., 2013. Impact assessment of alien macroinvertebrates in Flanders (Belgium). PhD thesis, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium. 209 p.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Boets P., Brosens D., Lock K., Adriaens T., Aelterman B., Mertens J., Goethals P.L.M., 2016. Alien macroinvertebrates in Flanders (Belgium). Aquatic Invasions (2016) Volume 11, Issue 2: 131\u8211?144.\f3\fs24\cf0  \f3\fs24\cf0 DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.3391/ai.2016.11.2.03\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Boets P., Lock K., Goethals P.L.M. (2010b). First record of Synurella ambulans (M\u252?ller, 1846) (Amphipoda: Crangonictidae) in Belgium. Belgian Journal of Zoology 140(2): 244-245.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Boets P., Lock K., Tempelman D., van Haaren T., Platvoet D., Goethals P.L.M. (2012b). First occurrence of the Ponto-Caspian amphipod Echinogammarus trichiatus (Martynov, 1932) (Crustacea: Gammaridae) in Belgium. Bioinvasion records 1(2): 115-120.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Boets P., Lock K., Adriaens T., Mouton A., Goethals P.L.M. (2012c). Distribution of crayfish (Decapoda, Astacoidea) in Flanders (Belgium): an update. Belgian Journal of Zoology 142(1): 86-92.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Boets P., Lock K., Adriaens T. & Goethals P., 2014. Exotische macroinvertebraten in Vlaanderen -  Verspreiding en impact op inheemse waterfauna. Natuur.focus 13(1): 22-30. (in Dutch)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 De Somere P., 2008. Datagebaseerde verspreidingsmodellen voor macro-invertebraten in Vlaamse riviersedimenten / Data driven species distribution models for macroinvertebrates in Flemish river sediments. Universiteit Gent, Faculteit Bio-Ingenieurswetenschappen. Academiejaar 2007-2008. Masterproef voorgedragen tot het behalen van de graad van \u8216?Master in de Milieusanering en het Milieubeheer\u8217?. 54 p.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Gabriels W., 2007. Multimetric assessment of freshwater macroinvertebrate communities in Flanders, Belgium. PhD thesis. Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, Belgium. 207 p.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Gabriels W., Goethals P. L. M. & De Pauw N., 2005. Implications of taxonomic modifications and alien species on biological water quality assessment as exemplified by the Belgian Biotic Index method. Hydrobiologia (2005) 542:137\u8211?150.\f3\fs24\cf0  \f3\fs24\cf0 DOI 10.1007/s10750-004-1452-7 \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Gabriels W., Lock K., De Pauw N. & Goethals P.L.M., 2010. Multimetric Macroinvertebrate Index Flanders (MMIF) for biological assessment of rivers and lakes in Flanders (Belgium). Limnologica 40 (2010) 199\u8211?207. doi:10.1016/j.limno.2009.10.001\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Goethals P.L.M., 2005. Data Driven Development of Predictive Ecological Models for Benthic Macroinvertebrates in Rivers - Gegevensgebaseerde Ontwikkeling van Predictieve Ecologische Modellen voor Benthische Macro-invertebraten in Rivieren. Thesis submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor (PhD) in Applied Biological Sciences / Proefschrift voorgedragen tot het bekomen van de graad van Doctor in de Toegepaste Biologische Wetenschappen. Academiejaar 2004-2005. Universiteit Gent, Faculteit Bio-ingenieurswetenschappen. 378 p.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Goethals P., Gabriels W., Dedecker A., De Cooman W. & De Pauw N., 2006. Analyse van relaties tussen sedimentkarakteristieken en macroinvertebratengemeenschappen a.d.h.v. data mining technieken. Tijdschrift Water (2006): 4 p.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Lock K., 2013. First records of trickle midges in Flanders (Diptera : Thaumaleidae). Bulletin de la Soci\u233?t\u233? royale belge d\u8217?Entomologie/Bulletin van de Koninklijke Belgische Vereniging voor Entomologie, 149 (2013) : 160-162.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Lock K., Adriaens T., Goethals P., 2014. Effect of water quality on blackflies (Diptera: Simuliidae) in Flanders (Belgium). Limnologica 44 (January 2014): 58\u8211?65.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Lock K., Dekoninck W., Adriaens T. & Goethals P.L.M., 2012. Distribution and ecology of mosquito larvae (Diptera: Culicidae) in Flanders (Belgium). Belg. J. Zool., 142 (2): 138-142.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Lock K., Dekoninck W., Van De Meutter F. & Goethals P.L.M., 2012.  Effect of water quality on waterbugs (Hemiptera: Gerromorpha & Nepomorpha) in Flanders (Belgium): results from a large-scale field survey. Ann. Limnol. - Int. J. Lim. 49 (2013) 121\u8211?128.\f3\fs24\cf0  \f3\fs24\cf0 DOI: 10.1051/limn/2013047\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Lock K.,. & Goethals P.L.M., 2008. Distribution and ecology of the stoneflies (Plecoptera) of Flanders (Belgium). Ann. Limnol. - Int. J. Lim. 2008, 44 (3: 203 \u8211? 213.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Lock K.,. & Goethals P.L.M., 2011. Distribution and ecology of the mayflies (Ephemeroptera) of Flanders (Belgium). Ann. Limnol. - Int. J. Lim. 47 (2011): 159\u8211?165.\f3\fs24\cf0  \f3\fs24\cf0 DOI: 10.1051/limn/2011011\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Lock K.,. & Goethals P.L.M., 2012.  Distribution and ecology of the caddisflies (Trichoptera) of Flanders (Belgium). Ann. Limnol. - Int. J. Lim. 48 (2012: 31\u8211?37.\f3\fs24\cf0  \f3\fs24\cf0 DOI: 10.1051/limn/2011056 \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Lock K.,. & Goethals P.L.M., 2014. Predicting the occurrence of stoneflies (Plecoptera) on the basis of water characteristics, river morphology and land use. Journal of Hydroinformatics 16 (4 ): 812-821.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Lock K., Van Haaren T., Tempelman D., Ch\u233?rot F. & Adriaens T., 2013. Distribution and ecology of soldier fly larvae captured in Flemish surface waters (Diptera : Stratiomyidae). Bulletin de la Soci\u233?t\u233? royale belge d\u8217?Entomologie/Bulletin van de Koninklijke Belgische Vereniging voor Entomologie, 149 (2013): 150-159.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Messiaen M., Lock K., Gabriels W., Vercauteren T., Wouters K., Boets P., Goethals P.L.M., 2010. Alien macrocrustaceans in freshwater ecosystems in the eastern part of Flanders (Belgium). Belgian Journal of Zoology 140(1): 30-39.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par}